# STAT228-News-Popularity

## Objective
Given online news’ tremendous popularity and its potential societal impacts, this study seeks to understand which characteristics within the
text of a news article corresponds to a higher number of shares. Using a data set obtained from the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository that 
contains information on 39,644 articles published on Mashable, we utilized 58 predictive attributes to determine which had the greatest impact 
on the variable of interest. AIC and BIC stepwise regression were used to determine the best multiple linear regression model, and a regression 
tree was created to provide extra information about which variables are most useful. This final model suggests that day of the week, category, 
subjectivity, and amount of positive words are key characteristics of online news articles.

## Methods
To answer the research question, the dataset “Online News Popularity”  from the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository was utilized (Fernandez). This data set contains 61 characteristics of 39,644 Mashable articles obtained between 2013 and 2015. These characteristics and their descriptions can be found in table 1, but some examples include the type of channel the article was shared in, the day of the week it was published, and the rate of positive words as well as the number of shares which is the dependent variable of interest used as a determinant of popularity. The data set did not contain any missing values, so no data imputation was necessary. The URL variable was removed since given our methods of analysis, it would not provide any useful insights. Other variables were removed that were part of sets of dummy variables to allow us to perform VIF. Prior to running the regressions, we checked for multicollinearity using VIF stepwise variable selection. From this we decided to remove 5 variables - n_unique_tokens, n_non_stop_words, self_reference_avg_sharess, rate_positive_words, and kw_max_min.

Following this, we checked the assumptions of multiple linear regression (linearity, independence, constant variance, and normal distribution) using the diagnostic plots from running a linear regression on all remaining predictors in the data set, as shown in figure 1. Looking at the Residuals vs. Fitted Values plot, we discovered the data did not follow the constant variance and linearity assumptions since the values are not centered around zero and are not evenly distributed across the line. The data also does not follow the normal distribution assumption. We see this from looking at the Normal Q-Q plot. The data should fall across the line; however, we see the tails are skewed away from the line. Because of these violations of the assumptions, it was decided that the best course of action was to log the shares variable as well as removing any outliers shown in the diagnostic plots.  It was decided to remove outliers since, in the context of our data set, it did not seem practical to determine characteristics for an article that had extreme numbers of shares since those characteristics behind that are most likely also due to outside factors besides the textual components of the article itself. We then ran the full regression again, which resulted in the diagnostic plots shown in figure 2. We now see the assumptions fully met with the variances more evenly distributed and centered around zero and the observations following the line in the Normal Q-Q plot.

Multiple linear regression was deemed the best method of analysis since this can provide the variables that are associated with the greatest percentage point increase in the number of shares. A regression tree will also be utilized to support any results found by the multiple linear regression. Given that there are so many predictor variables, PCA was initially considered because it could help to reduce dimensionality; however, the goal of this study was to interpret the output, which would not have been as easily done if PCA were involved. Interpretability was extremely important given that these results could actually be applied by companies to increase engagement with articles. To find the regression model that best fits the data, AIC and BIC stepwise regressions were performed. The number of variables, R-squared, adjusted R-squared, and CV-scores were then compared to determine which model better fit the data. Once the best linear regression model was determined, diagnostic plots were once again utilized to remove outliers. A regression tree was then created and pruned to determine if any of the significant characteristics found in the regression model are especially important in their association with increasing the number of shares.

